Date: 2012-04-01
Title: Six Reasons Scala is Awesome
Tags: scala
Category: Posts
Author: Ian Forsey

Scala is a really nice programming language to work with and is easy for devs coming from the Java world (like me) to pick up, due to the fact it runs on the JVM. I thought I'd share the six main reasons I've been using Scala for many of my projects at the moment.

# 1. Scala feels like a dynamically typed language, but without the suck

That's a bit harsh - I enjoy using dynamically typed languages, but generally speaking I tend to lean towards statically typed langauges because:

 * When using a library, I know what to pass into functions. I don't have to play the guessing game (or wade through library code that really should be encapsulated away from me) when documentation is poor.
 * Intelligent code completion.
 * Compile time type checking.

I know there are counter benefits to using dynamically typed languages and one of the things I love about dynamically typed languages is that they are generally much more succinct and allow you knock things up in a fraction of the time of statically typed languages where you can feel like you are getting bogged down with the vebose syntax - you have to specify types everywhere!

Scala strikes a nice balance in this regard. Declaring varibles is concise as you need not declare the type:

    val animal = "Cat"
    
Despite the lack of a type, Scala is a statically typed language. Functions _must_ declare their argument and return types and this is why is the type declaration is optional for variables - no matter what you are assigning to your variable, Scala can infer the variable type (note: if you are only declaring a variable and not assigning anything to it, you must specify the type).

Scala is succinct is many other ways, which leads be to....

# 2. Case classes

Case classes are the Scala equivalent of Java POJOs - objects you use to hold state and often don't do a whole lot else. The difference is that Scala case classes don't have all the bolierplate cruft of Java POJOs. Here is a case class in Scala:

    case class Animal(type:String, sound:String)

If you omit the `case` keyword you'd have a standard scala class, but the presence of the `case` keyword auto-magically gives the class these benefits for free:

 * Autogenerated getter methods.
 * Autogenerated equals() and hashCode() - based on all the class fields.
 * Autogenerated friendly toString() - displays the class name and all the class fields.
 * Autogenerated copy() method that can be used to create a copy of any objects of this class. The method takes arguments to change field values in the copy.
 * No longer need to use the `new` keyword to instansiate objects of this class.
 * Pattern matching.

Note how only getter methods are generated, not setter methods. This is because Scala promotes the use of immutable objects (hence the copy method), however if you do want to create a mutable case class with setters as well as getters, you can use the `var` keyword:

     case class Animal(var kind:String, var sound:String)

Pattern matching is a nice language feature in Scala. It allows you to use instances of your case classes along with wildcards in switch style statements:

    val bingo = Animal("Dog", "Woof");
    bingo match {
        case Animal(_, "Chirp") => println("This is an animal that chirps")
        case Animal(_, _) =>  println("This is any animal")
        case Reptile(_, _) =>  println("This is a animal of subtype Reptile")
    }

# 3. Named and Default Arguments

For constructor and method arguments you can specify defaults:

    > class Animal(kind:String, sound:String="Woof")
    > new Animal("Dog")
    res1: Animal = Animal(Dog,Woof)

You can also use similar syntax when calling a constructor or method to reference arguments by name, rather than position:

    > val cat = new Animal(kind="Cat", sound="Meow")
    cat: Animal = Animal(Cat,Meow)


This comes in useful when you have many default arguments and need to highlight which arguments you want to specify.

    > val tiger = cat.copy(sound="Roar!")
    tiger: Animal = Animal(Cat,Roar!)

# 4. Awesome Collections Framework

You can do some really nice things with the core collections framework. It's like the Guava, the Java library, but with nicer syntax. There is too much goodness to show here, but here are a few things you can do:

    > val animals = List(
        Animal("Cat"),
        Animal("Dog"),
        Animal("Mouse")
    )

    > //map takes a function and uses it to transform each element in the list
    > animals.map(animal:Animal => {
        return animal.kind
    })
    res1: List[String] = List(Cat, Dog, Mouse)

    > //Same as above, but short hand
    > animals.map(_.kind)
    res2: List[String] = List(Cat, Dog, Mouse)


    > res2.filter(_.startsWith("D"))
    res3: List[String] = List(Dog)

    > res2.groupBy(_.length())
    res4: Map[Int,String] = Map((3 -> List(Cat,Dog))(5 -> List(Mouse)))

# 5. Integration with Java Libraries

Java and Scala code can be used together. You can call Java code from within Scala and vice versa. This is great, because you can still use all the great Java libraries you know and love. It also means you can start writing Scala code in exisitng Java systems - you don't have to go big bang and port everything to Scala to gain it's benefits at once.

# 6. Scala Console

Type `scala` in your terminal and you get the Scala console. This is a great sandbox for testing stuff and makes it real easy to start playing. It's this same reason that made me fall in love with bash. 

PS. I used the Scala Console to write the examples for this blog post :)
